Update: Rewrite AI Gateway Getting Started guide (#8056)
Kong/docs.konghq.com: app/_src/gateway/get-started/ai-gateway.md

---
title: Get started with AI Gateway
content-type: tutorial
---

With Kong's AI Gateway, you can deploy AI infrastructure for traffic 
being sent to one or more LLMs, which lets you semantically route, secure, observe, accelerate, 
and govern using a special set of AI plugins that are bundled with {{site.base_gateway}} distributions.

Kong AI Gateway is a set of [AI plugins](/hub/?category=ai), which can be used by
installing {{site.base_gateway}} and then by following the documented configuration instructions for each plugin. 
The AI plugins are supported in all deployment modes, 
including {{site.konnect_short_name}}, self-hosted traditional, hybrid, and DB-less, and on Kubernetes via the 
[{{site.kic_product_name}}](/kubernetes-ingress-controller/latest/).

> The AI plugins are fully supported by {{site.konnect_short_name}} in both hybrid mode, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AI plugins are fully supported by {{site.konnect_short_name}} in both hybrid mode, 
```

and as a [fully managed service](/konnect/gateway-manager/dedicated-cloud-gateways).

You can enable most {{site.base_gateway}} AI capabilities with one of the following plugins:

> * [AI Proxy](/hub/kong-inc/ai-proxy/) plugin (open-source)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [AI Proxy](/hub/kong-inc/ai-proxy/): The open source AI proxy plugin.
```

> * [AI Proxy Advanced](/hub/kong-inc/ai-proxy-advanced/) (Enterprise): 
> More advanced load balancing, routing, and retries

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [AI Proxy Advanced](/hub/kong-inc/ai-proxy-advanced/): 
The enterprise version offering more advanced load balancing, routing, and retries. 
```

  --header "Content-Type: application/json" \
  --header "Authorization: Bearer TOKEN" \
  --data '
    {
      "name": "llm_service",
      "url": "http://fake.host.internal"
    }
```

Then, create a route for the service:
```sh
curl -X POST \
https://{us|eu}.api.konghq.com/v2/control-planes/{controlPlaneId}/core-entities/services/{serviceID}/routes \
  --header "accept: application/json" \
  --header "Content-Type: application/json" \
  --header "Authorization: Bearer TOKEN" \
  --data  '
    {
      "name": "openai-llm",
      "paths": [
        {
          "/openai"
        }
      ]
    }
```

Take note of the route ID in the response.

{% endnavtab %}
{% endnavtabs %}

Adding this route entity creates an ingress rule on the `/openai` path. 

{:.note}
> These examples use the fake URL `http://fake.host.internal` as the upstream URL for the service - but you don't need to replace it with a real one.
This is because the service upstream URL won't really matter, because after installing the AI Proxy plugin (or AI Proxy Advanced), 
the upstream proxying destination will be determined dynamically based on your AI Proxy plugin configuration.

> ### 2. Install an AI Proxy plugin

Reviewer: I know you talk about both but I think its okay to mention just one.

```sh
curl --http1.1 http://localhost:8000/openai \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $OPENAI_API_KEY" \
  -d '{
     "model": "gpt-4o-mini",
     "messages": [{"role": "user", "content": "Say this is a test!"}]
   }'
```

You should get a response that looks like this, containing the response `This is a test!`:

```json
{
  "id": "chatcmpl-AIm1TMhTkcH1sf67GYXIM5fsfu94X9Gdk",
  "object": "chat.completion",
  "created": 1729037867,
  "model": "gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18",
  "choices": [
    {
      "index": 0,
      "message": {
        "role": "assistant",
        "content": "This is a test! How can I assist you today?",
        "refusal": null
      },
      "logprobs": null,
      "finish_reason": "stop"
    }
  ],
  "usage": {
    "prompt_tokens": 13,
    "completion_tokens": 12,
    "total_tokens": 25,
    "prompt_tokens_details": {
      "cached_tokens": 0
    },
    "completion_tokens_details": {
      "reasoning_tokens": 0
    }
  },
  "system_fingerprint": "fp_r0bdr52e6e"
}
```

And just like that, your traffic is now being properly proxied to OpenAI via {{site.base_gateway}} and its AI plugins!

## Installing more AI plugins

> The AI Proxy and AI Proxy Advanced plugins are able to understand the incoming OpenAI protocol, 

Author: ```suggestion
AI Proxy and AI Proxy Advanced plugins are able to understand the incoming OpenAI protocol.
```

so you can now further apply deep capabilities like:

* Route to [all other LLMs](/hub/kong-inc/ai-proxy-advanced/) that we support, 
even the ones that don't natively support the OpenAI specification, as Kong will automatically transform the request. 
Write once, and use all LLMs.
* Extract [observability metrics for AI](/gateway/latest/production/monitoring/ai-metrics/).

> * Accelerate traffic with the [AI Semantic cache plugin](/hub/kong-inc/ai-semantic-cache/) plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Cache traffic using the [AI Semantic cache plugin](/hub/kong-inc/ai-semantic-cache/) plugin.
```

* Secure traffic with the [AI Prompt Guard](/hub/kong-inc/ai-prompt-guard/) and 
[AI Semantic Prompt Guard](/hub/kong-inc/ai-semantic-prompt-guard/) plugins.
* Provide prompt templates with [AI Prompt template](/hub/kong-inc/ai-prompt-template/).

> * Automatically inject system or assistant prompts on every incoming prompt via the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Programmatically inject system or assistant prompts to all incoming prompts with the 
```

[AI Prompt Decorator](/hub/kong-inc/ai-prompt-decorator/).

See all the [AI plugins](/hub/?category=ai) for more capabilities.

For example, you can rate limit AI traffic based on the number of tokens that are being sent 
(as opposed to the number of API requests) using the [AI Rate Limiting Advanced](/hub/kong-inc/ai-rate-limiting-advanced/) plugin:

```sh
curl -X POST http://localhost:8001/services/llm_service/plugins \
    --header "accept: application/json" \
    --header "Content-Type: application/json" \
    --data '
    {
  "name": "ai-rate-limiting-advanced",
  "config": {
    "llm_providers": [
      {
        "name": "openai",
        "limit": 5,
        "window_size": 60
      }
    ]
  }
}'
```

Every other {{site.base_gateway}} plugin can also be used in addition to the AI plugins, for advanced access control, authorization and authentication, security, observability, and more.

> ## Quickstart script

Reviewer: I think we can delete this from here and throw it in: 
https://deploy-preview-8056--kongdocs.netlify.app/gateway/latest/ai-gateway/

But I don't feel very strongly about it so feel free to keep it.

Author: I'm good with that, and I think it would be a better compromise for this whole update.
